---
tags:
  - zettel
  - academic
  - cc
aliases:
  - final assignment
title: coconut
description: computational creativity - final assignment - co-creating co-creativity and user testing
parent nodes:
  - "[[computational creativity]]"
child nodes: 
annotation-target:
---

## Methods

1. We have a system where the audience can scan a QR code and add songs to a list 
2. The songs are then filtered based on the genre being played by the DJ
3. The songs are then ranked by number of votes
4. The audio from the crowd is analysed 
5. Engagement from the crowd is used to select the next song from the list based on the current song and similarity search


# Task
## COCONUT: Co-creating Co-creativity ‘N’ User Testing

In this final assignment, you must design and implement a co-creative system of your choice and write a short research paper about it. This assignment is intended to be done in groups of up to 4 people in collaboration with at least 1 generative system.

The assignment is an opportunity to _explore_ co-creativity as a research area and _collaborate_ with a generative system throughout the process of completing the assignment. The collaboration can happen at various stages of the project. You can work, for example, with a freely available interactive large language model, like ChatGPT, to brainstorm ideas for the co-creative system you want to design and implement. You can use image-generating systems to visualise many iterations of an idea quickly. You can implement a simple agent-based system to 'evolve' some parameters of your co-creative system design. You can work with an interactive large language model to explore different ways to design and implement your co-creative system. Finally, you can work with an interactive large language model to design a procedure for evaluating your co-creative system. (You are not limited to these interactions with a generative system, these suggestions are provided for inspiration.)

## Background

Computational co-creativity goes beyond the development of ‘creativity support tools’[^1] by developing systems that collaborate in an ongoing creative process. In this context, a ‘co-creative system’ combines multiple "agents", whether humans and/or machines and is primarily defined by the interaction process.

Co-creative systems can be developed as peers, i.e., engaged in the same activity as a human interacting with the system, e.g. The Drawing Apprentice[^2] engages directly in the task of co-creating a sketch in real-time through turn-taking. Alternatively, co-creative systems can be developed to take advantage of the relative strengths of the agents involved, e.g., Creative Sketching Partner[^3] is a different take on how a co-creative system can be part of the sketching process by searching for inspiring examples from [Google’s QuickDraw! corpus](https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/). [Garry Kasparov’s TED Talk](https://www.ted.com/talks/garry_kasparov_don_t_fear_intelligent_machines_work_with_them) and his book[^4] provide some interesting insights into why this might be particularly interesting.

## Assignment Task

The goal of this assignment is to explore co-creative systems. Consequently, this assignment focuses on designing and implementing interactive creative processes. The assignment will result in a short research paper, written following the guidelines and template of the International Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC), the premier forum for disseminating computational creativity and creative AI research. The page limit is 4 pages (with additional unlimited pages for references), and the template (in Word or Latex, choose which you prefer) can be found here: `/Documents/Obsidian/other resources/computational creativity/final assignment`

Below are some links to representative papers from previous ICCC conferences on co-creative systems, which have been listed as examples. We highly recommend you look at these for inspiration on how to structure your paper:

[[collaborative_storytelling_with_human_actors_and_ai_narrators_paper_type_event_report.pdf|Branch, Mirowski, Mathewson (2021) Collaborative Storytelling with Human Actors and AI Narrators]]

[[towards_co_creative_drawing_based_on_contrastive_language_image_models.pdf|Ibarrola, Bown, Grace (2022) Towards Co-Creative Drawing Based on Contrastive Language-Image Models]]

[[when_happy_accidents_spark_creativity_bringing_collaborative_speculation_to_life_with_generative_ai.pdf|Epstein, Schroeder, Newman (2022) When happy accidents spark creativity: Bringing collaborative speculation to life with generative AI]]

[[co_creation_and_ownership_for_ai_radio.pdf|Gordon, Mahari, Mishra, Epstein (2022) Co-creation and ownership for AI radio]]

[[imagination_tool_accessible_ai_image_generation_software_to_support_child_ideation_and_creative_expression_paper_type_system_demonstration.pdf|Meric, White, Zapico (2024) Imagination Tool: Accessible AI Image Generation Software to Support Child Ideation and Creative Expression]]

The ICCC conference accepts various different types of papers, and you can choose with your group to focus on one of these two options:  
- **Technical papers:** These are papers posing and addressing hypotheses about aspects of creative behaviour in computational systems. The emphasis here is on using solid experimentation, computational models, formal proof, and/or argumentation that clearly demonstrates advancement in the state-of-the-art or current thinking in CC research. Strong evaluation of approaches through comparative, statistical, social, or other means is essential.   
- **System or Resource description papers:** These papers describe the building and deploying of a creative system or resource to produce artefacts of potential cultural value in one or more domains. The emphasis here is on presenting engineering achievement, technical difficulties encountered and overcome, techniques employed, reusable resources built, and general findings about how to get computational systems to produce valuable results. Presentation of results from the system or resource is expected. While a full evaluation of the approaches employed is not essential if the technical achievement is very high, some evaluation is expected to show the contribution to CC of this work.

### Assignment Subtasks

The assignment can be broken down into the following subtasks:

#### Research Co-creativity

The first subtask of this assignment is to conduct a little research into co-creativity. You may choose to focus on existing co-creative computational systems, e.g., music-improvising robots[^5], or you may wish to focus on the ways that humans collaborate, e.g., games designed to promote creative collaboration in teams (you could even try playing some of these in your team).

A written report of your research findings and how this guides and/or inspires the development of your co-creative system will form the 'Background' or 'Related work' section of your paper. If you have conducted initial human studies to investigate co-creativity, you should document this and your findings in your 'Results' section.  You should report on how you used a generative system to help you in the background research task and your ideation around your system's design and possible implementation. Include any reflections on the generative system's helpfulness for this subgoal.

#### Implement a Co-creative System

The focus of your implementation should be on translating your research findings into a co-creative system. The goal is _not_ to implement the most sophisticated piece of code but to ground your implementation in your research. For example, you may choose to implement some of your computational systems using a “Wizard of Oz” technique[^6], i.e., where a person takes the place of a smart system but follows the rules about how they can respond.

You are not constrained in the domain of your co-creative systems. You may choose any domain, whether or not we have covered it in this class. The focus of your implementation should be the _interaction_. You may choose to use a pre-trained generative system as part of your co-creative system, in which case you should focus on what this contributes to your research of a co-creative system (which will be bigger than the generative system).

Write a short (approx. 500 words) description of the co-creative system you have implemented. Document any contributions that your generative system(s) provided as part of the implementation. Include any reflections on the generative system's helpfulness for this subgoal. This will form part of your paper's 'Methods' or 'Implementation' section.

#### Evaluate Co-creative System

Evaluate your co-creative system by conducting user studies with people not in your team (especially if you go for the 'Technical paper' category). Note that your test subject(s) may be from the class. You are encouraged to use your generative system(s) to help design the experimental methodology and the means of analysis. Note that you should check the recommendations of the generative system for accuracy and appropriateness and document your reflections on the helpfulness of the system in your paper.

You may choose to evaluate your co-creative system with a domain expert. For example, if you have built a co-creative system for producing music, you may consider evaluating it by asking a musician to create with it. Or you may decide that your system is intended for use by a novice, e.g., if you have built a co-creative system for writing poems, you may want to evaluate it by asking one or more non-poets to try to use it.

You may choose to focus your evaluation on the _process_ of co-creation. You can assess the _experience_ using qualitative methods, e.g., a structured interview of your subject after the experiment, or quantitative methods, e.g., comparing the length of engagement with a co-creative system with different configurations. Alternatively, you may choose to evaluate the _product_ of your co-creative system, e.g., measure the fluency, flexibility, originality and elaboration of your co-creative system (see [[202409291841 - what is creativity|Lecture 2: What is Creativity]]).

Evaluation can also involve presenting technical achievements achieved in creating the co-creative system (especially if you choose the 'System or Resource description paper' category). Here, the emphasis is more strongly on showing how the system produces valuable results that can be computationally evaluated.

A written report on the evaluation of your co-creative system with a reflection on any notable successes or failures you observed will form the 'Results' section of your paper.

Finally, the paper will contain a 'Discussion' section file containing your evaluation and reflection on your implementation of a co-creative system. Conclude with some thoughts on possible future work. You should document any contributions made by your generative model(s) to the design and analysis of your evaluation. Include any reflections on the generative system's helpfulness for this subgoal.

## Deliverables

The deliverables for this assignment are:

1. A PDF document containing your paper on co-creativity.
2. A zip archive of your source code and data files for your co-creative system. This should include a README file that describes the system requirements for compiling and running your system. (If you have used a Wizard of Oz approach for some of your systems, your implementation includes the instructions given to the person taking the place of a computational system.) Note: evaluation will be based on the paper and not the implementation. The system needs to be submitted but will be used only to check claims made in the paper.


[^1]: Shneiderman, B. (2007) [Creativity Support Tools: Accelerating Discovery and Innovation](https://doi.org/10.1145/1323688.1323689). Communications of the ACM 50(12):20–32. doi:10.1145/1323688.1323689  
[^2]: Davis, N., Hsiao, C.–P., Popova, Y., Magerko, B. (2015) [An Enactive Model of Creativity for Computational Collaboration and Co–creation](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/An-Enactive-Model-of-Creativity-for-Computational-Davis-Hsiao/d98198ed9476b2eb47ab020dd96ad1b455e03110). In: Creativity in the Digital Age, 109–133 
[^3]: Karimi, P., Rezwana, J., Siddiqui, S., Maher, M.–L., Dehbozorgi, N. (2020). [Creative Sketching Partner: An Analysis of Human–AI Co–creativity](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339985139_Creative_sketching_partner_an_analysis_of_human-AI_co-creativity). 221–230. 10.1145/3377325.3377522.  
[^4]: Kasparov, G. (2017) [Deep Thinking: Where Machine Intelligence Ends and Human Creativity Begins](https://www.publicaffairsbooks.com/titles/garry-kasparov/deep-thinking/9781610397872/). PublicAffairs.
[^5]: [Shimon Robot and Friends Performance in Istanbul](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wtiE19O3M-4) has some great demonstrations of the co–creative abilities of Shimon. 
[^6]: See the Wikipedia article on the use of [Wizard of Oz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wizard_of_Oz_experiment) experiments in Human–Computer Interaction
