---
tags:
  - academic
  - cc
aliases:
  - assignment one
title: bad poets society
description: computational creativity - assignment one
parent nodes:
  - "[[computational creativity]]"
child nodes:
---

## Objective

In this assignment, you are required to build a poem generator. You may use any of the approaches you like covered by the lectures.

## Subtasks

#### Gather an Inspiring Set for Poems

To inform the development of your poem generator, start by gathering an inspiring set of poems. Remember from Ritchie's definition of an inspiring set that it does not require that it be recorded in a database. Your system does not _have_ to read a file containing your inspiring set, but the inspiring set should provide examples of the types of poems that you would like your system to produce, even if they are not used directly. You should document your inspiring set in your logbook.

To get started, you may wish to explore the following resources:

- [Poetry.net](https://www.poetry.net/)
- [Poetry Foundation](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/)
- [PoemHunter.com](https://www.poemhunter.com/)

#### Implement a Poem Generator

Implement a poem generator using an approach of your choosing, e.g., templates, grammars, Markov chains, etc. The techniques covered in the tutorials so far should provide you with good starting points for implementing such a system. You are not limited to the techniques covered in class, e.g., you may use pre-trained models, but you are expected to think critically about your choice and how this impacts your inspiring set. You may implement your system in either Javascript or Python. You may use external libraries to implement your poem generator, e.g., RiTa, Tracery, spaCy, Tensorflow, etc.

Think carefully about the _stopping criteria_ for your poem generator, i.e., when should your system stop producing a poem, and what do you want your system to output at the end of a run, e.g., should your system generate a poem of a fixed length, or should it generate a poem of a particular style. You should document your initial idea for your poetry generator in your logbook and update this as you implement your system based on challenges faced or new goals you wish to achieve.

### Use a Generative AI to present your poems

Decide how you want to present (at least) three of the poems your system has generated, e.g., visually using text and images, orally using spoken word, or traditionally in an anthology. Use a Generative AI to help you present your poems, e.g., use a text-to-image generator (e.g. Stable Diffusion, Dall-E, Midjourney, etc.) to produce imagery for your poems (or verses) or use a text-to-speech generator (Speechify, ElevenLabs, etc.) to produce a spoken version of your poem. (You are not limited to these options.) You may use the generated material as-is or as the basis for your presentation and augment it, e.g., add the text of your poetry to an image. Think about the presentation of your poems as part of your creative system, as a way of increasing the perceived value of a poem.

## Deliverables

The deliverables for this assignment are:

1. A file (e.g. a PDF or Jupyter notebook) containing a "logbook" of your process and reflections on developing your creative system, which provides a brief step-by-step account of how you tackled the tasks outlined above and your thoughts on the process, e.g., how you decided on your inspiring set. You should also reflect on the experience of using a Generative AI to help you present your poems. **IMPORTANT:** The final entry of your logbook should reflect on the question of how to evaluate the creativity of your system or if you tried to evaluate how this went.
2. A zip archive of your source code and data files for your creative system. (If your system was implemented entirely as a Jupyter Notebook, this archive should contain additional copies and data files.) This should include a README file that describes the system requirements for compiling and running your system. **NOTE:** If you are developing your system using the online editor at P5js, you should download and submit a copy of your source files. (You must log in to the P5js editor to do this.)
3. A zip archive containing the presentation of at least three poems generated by your system and presented using a Generative AI. The file should also contain the complete texts of each poem presented.

## Resources

An excellent example of an exploration of the development of a generator is Darius Kazemi's blog post [Creating rhyming quatrains for @SortingBot](http://tinysubversions.com/notes/sorting-bot/). There is an exercise in [Tutorial 1](https://brightspace.universiteitleiden.nl/d2l/common/dialogs/quickLink/quickLink.d2l?ou=331602&type=content&rcode=leidenprod-699658) to explore some aspects of implementing this generator using the RiTa library for Javascript.