---
tags:
  - music
  - music_theory
aliases:
  - bass line
title: bass line 101
description: learning base lines
parent nodes:
  - "[[music theory]]"
child nodes: 
annotation-target:
---

Basslines are patterns of low-pitched notes. They often serve to reinforce a song's chords while also using interesting rhythmic patterns that relate to or contrast with the drums.

## Good Life - Inner City

The short, snappy bass notes in this track are played on a **Yamaha DX100 synthesizer**.

Most synthesizers, including the DX100, provide a number of different pre-made sound settings (called _presets_). This specific sound is a DX100 preset called "Solid Bass" and was used on many techno and house tracks in the 90s.

> In this early techno classic, the bassline plays short notes with an intricate rhythm. This creates an interesting contrast with the mostly four-on-the-floor drum pattern.

## Around the World - Daft Punk

Daft Punk don't share a lot of details about their process, so it's not entirely clear what instrument plays the bassline on this track. The style is consistent with the way a funk bassist might play a bass guitar, but this can also be done with a synthesizer.

This bassline has an interesting shape: a sort of "ascending stairs" pattern that repeats three times before "climbing" back down the notes of the scale. The use of three repeating variations followed by a new idea is a common composition technique.

> Chord Progression
> 1 3 5 4

- ==Three repeated patterns, followed by a new idea.==
- The same chord progression found in ==Get Lucky - Daft Punk==

## Never Tell You - Rhythm and Sound

Similarly to Daft Punk, Rhythm & Sound almost never share the secrets of their equipment and music-making process. But this bass sound was created on a synthesizer of some kind.

The bassline in this dub techno track is probably the most important element. There are chords, but they're very much in the background. (Note that these chords are played with the same offbeat "skank" rhythm that you learned [earlier](https://learningmusic.ableton.com/chords/get-up-stand-up.html). This rhythm is very common in reggae, dub, and related styles.)

Despite the central focus of the bassline, notice how little actually happens in it; most of the pattern is empty space, and when notes do occur, they're mostly in unusual rhythmic spaces "in between" the beats.

## Oblivion - Grimes

Synthesizers play all of the instrumental parts in this song. Besides the vocals, the bassline is the most prominent layer here.

The bassline is eight bars long, but can be further broken down into two groups of four bars.

The first two bars are a pattern made from the notes in a D minor triad. The two-bar pattern repeats twice.

A rhythmic pattern of single notes that outlines a chord is called an _arpeggio_, and this is a common technique for creating basslines. Many synthesizers come with _arpeggiators_, which automatically create arpeggiated patterns when you hold down the notes of a chord.

- ==Arpeggio is a common technique to create basslines.==


---
%% 
(ideas:: Ideas - 202501292328) 
%%
> [!info] 2025-01-29
> > [!abstract] **Ideas:**
> > - Arpeggio sound like "Cyber Punk"

---
%% 
(resources:: Resources - 202501292321)
%%
> [!info] 2025-01-29
> > [!example] **Resources:**
> > - [Play with Bass Lines](https://learningmusic.ableton.com/make-basslines/play-with-basslines.html)
