---
tags:
  - music
  - music_theory
aliases:
  - synths
title: synths 101
description: basic synths
parent nodes:
  - "[[music theory]]"
child nodes:
annotation-target:
---

Most synths generate tones with _audio oscillators_. These are similar to the _low-frequency oscillators_ used for modulation, but they move much faster so they can produce tones directly.

## Amplitude

- One of the most common aspects of sound you can control with a synth is _amplitude_.
- Increasing the amplitude makes a sound louder. Decreasing the amplitude makes the sound softer. The volume on your phone or computer is an amplitude control.

## Pitch

- Another important aspect of sound is _pitch_ — its relative “highness” or “lowness”.
- Many musical instruments allow you to control pitch. For example, keys on the left side of a piano play lower pitches, while keys on the right side play higher pitches. Synthesizers can play a much wider range of pitch than any acoustic instrument — from the very lowest to the very highest sounds that humans can hear.

## Envelopes

- Synthesizers use _envelopes_ to create shapes designed for making musical sounds. You adjust the envelope’s controls to tell it what kind of shape to make.
- You don’t hear the envelope directly — the synth uses the envelope’s shape to determine how one or more _other_ aspects of the sound change over time. This process of using some part of the synthesizer to affect other parts is called _modulation._ An envelope is an example of a modulator.
- Most synthesizers have envelopes with four sections or _stages_, called _attack_, _decay_, _sustain_, and _release_. You’ll often see these abbreviated as _ADSR_.

## Attack

- An envelope’s _attack_ control determines how long it takes for the envelope to reach its peak at the start of a note.

## Decay and Sustain

- An envelope’s _decay_ control determines how long it takes for the envelope to decrease from its peak to the _sustain_ level. The envelope will then stay at the sustain level as long as the note is held.

## Release 

- An envelope’s _release_ control determines how long it takes for the envelope to decrease to its minimum level after the note is released.

## LFO

- Imagine you’re facing a spinning playground carousel with a speaker on it.
- As the carousel spins, the front of the speaker moves towards you and away from you again, and you hear the sound getting louder and quieter accordingly — the amplitude is being modulated.
- This repeating, back-and-forth change is called oscillation. Instead of envelopes, synthesizers use _oscillators_ to create this kind of modulation.
- This LFO modulates the pitch with a constant speed and shape.

#### LFO Speed

- The number tells you the LFO’s _frequency_ — how many times the oscillator moves from its highest point to its lowest and back in one second.
- Frequency is measured in a unit called _hertz_ (abbreviated Hz). A frequency of one hertz means that a full oscillation (or _cycle_) happens once per second.

#### LFO Amount

- Here, the number tells you how much the pitch will change in _semitones_. (A semitone is the difference in pitch between one key and the next on a piano.) The highest value (48 st) means 48 semitones above and below the central pitch (or a total of eight octaves).

#### LFO Shapes

- Changing the oscillator’s wave shape changes the character or _timbre_ of the sound. People often describe square waves as “woody” or “hollow” and saw waves as “buzzy” or “bright.”
- The height of the wave corresponds to its amplitude, which affects its loudness but not its timbre. If you drag all the way to the bottom, the amplitude is zero, and the waveform is silent.

###### Common Shapes

- Sine
- Saw Tooth
- Square

#### LFO Pulse Width

- Some oscillators produce a fixed shape, but other oscillators have controls that allow that shape to change.
- You can change the square oscillator’s timbre by changing its _pulse width_: the amount of time the oscillator spends in the high and low part of its cycle.
- The wave has its “fullest” sound at the center, where the waveform is symmetrical.

> You can modulate the Pulse Width with an LFO.

#### Fast Modulation

- Notice that as the LFO gets faster, the individual cycles of the LFO start to sound like they’re “blurring” together. The changes in pitch start to sound like changes in timbre, resulting in a “harsh” or “metallic” sound.
- This is an important sound design discovery: slow modulations are usually perceived as changes to behavior (changes that are applied to the sound), while fast modulations are usually perceived as changes to timbre (changes to the character of the sound itself).

## Filters

- Imagine there’s music playing in the next room. If the music is loud enough, you can hear it through the wall, but it usually sounds “muffled” or “dull”. This is because the wall is acting as a _filter_. It blocks the _high frequencies_ but lets the _low frequencies_ through.
- More high frequencies make a sound “brighter”. Less high frequencies make it “darker”.
- The sound of a filter being “swept” open or closed is [a classic technique](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RrU2DThhsZI&t=145) in many kinds of music.

#### Filter Resonance

- Filters often have another control, called _resonance_, that increases the amplitude around the cutoff frequency. Filter sweeps take on a very different character with different resonance settings.
- Notice that high resonance values create a kind of high “whistling” sound. With the resonance at a high value, try adjusting the cutoff and hear how this whistling sound changes.


---
%% 
(resources:: Resources - 202501301820)
%%
> [!info] 2025-01-30
> > [!example] **Resources:**
> > - [Play with Envelopes](https://learningsynths.ableton.com/en/envelopes/putting-the-envelope-together)
> > - [Get to know Synths](https://learningsynths.ableton.com/en/recipes/get-to-know-this-synth)
> > - [Play with Synths](https://learningsynths.ableton.com/en/playground)

---
%% 
(action-items:: Action Items - 202501302011) 
%%
> [!info] 2025-01-30
> > [!todo] **Action Items:**
> > - Make [Sounds with Synths](https://learningsynths.ableton.com/en/recipes/get-to-know-this-synth)

