---
tags:
  - music
  - music_theory
aliases:
  - song structures
title: song structures 101
description: basic song structures
parent nodes:
  - "[[music theory]]"
child nodes: 
annotation-target:
---

You can think of a song as a block of time, which can be broken down into smaller blocks of time. In many types of music, the smaller sections consist of even smaller patterns like those you've been making, combined in **multiples of four, eight, or 16 bars**.

Putting these sections together is _arranging_; it's how you get from small patterns to a full song.

## Song Forms

The combination of a song's sections is the song's _structure_ or _form_. Some types of forms are used over and over in many types of music.

# Bury It - CHVRCHES

> Common Song Form

## Intro

Many songs have an introductory section that lays out some of the sounds that will be used and establishes the song’s key. This song’s four-bar intro lays out the rhythmic synthesizer pattern that repeats often throughout the song.

> 4 bars
> Lay down base patterns

## Verse 1

In songs with vocals, the verse is usually a section that occurs multiple times and has the same music but different lyrics each time. This song’s two eight-bar verses work in exactly this way.

> 8 bars
> Same music, different lyrics each time

## Pre Chorus 1

In songs with vocals, the verse is usually a section that occurs multiple times and has the same music but different lyrics each time. This song’s two eight-bar verses work in exactly this way.

> 8 bars
> Same music, different lyrics each time

## Chorus

In songs with vocals, the chorus is usually a section that is repeated exactly; both the music and the lyrics are the same each time a chorus is repeated. The lyrics in the chorus often include the song’s title. The chorus is often the “strongest” part of the song: more instruments, higher pitches, louder overall sound, etc. This song’s first chorus is four bars long — half the length of the other two choruses.

> 4 bars
> Strongest Part: more instruments, higher pitches, louder overall sound

## Break 1

After each chorus is a four-bar instrumental transition. Notice that the break is similar to the intro, but with a much denser texture.

> 4 bar
> Instrumental transition similar to Intro 
> Denser texture than Intro

## Verse 2

The second verse is also eight bars long, but with some interesting differences from the first verse. The first two bars here are very sparse, before all of the instruments suddenly enter in the third bar.

> 8 bars
> The first two bars are sparse
> All instruments enter in the third bar

## Pre Chorus 2

A pre-chorus is a section that serves as a kind of link between a song’s verses and its choruses. In this song, each pre-chorus helps to build a sense of tension and energy that leads into the chorus. Each of the three eight-bar pre-choruses in this song has identical lyrics.

> 8 bars
> Identical to all the other pre choruses

## Chorus 2

In songs with vocals, the chorus is usually a section that is repeated exactly; both the music and the lyrics are the same each time a chorus is repeated. The lyrics in the chorus often include the song’s title. The chorus is often the “strongest” part of the song: more instruments, higher pitches, louder overall sound, etc. Note that this chorus is eight bars long — twice as long as the first chorus.

> 8 bars

## Break 2

After each chorus is a four-bar instrumental transition. This break is even more dense than the first one.

> 4 bars

## Pre Chorus 3

A pre-chorus is a section that serves as a kind of link between a song’s verses and its choruses. In this song, each pre-chorus helps to build a sense of tension and energy that leads into the chorus. Each of the three eight-bar pre-choruses in this song has identical lyrics.

## Chorus 3

In songs with vocals, the chorus is usually a section that is repeated exactly; both the music and the lyrics are the same each time a chorus is repeated. The lyrics in the chorus often include the song’s title. The chorus is often the “strongest” part of the song: more instruments, higher pitches, louder overall sound, etc. Like the second chorus, this song’s third chorus is eight bars long — twice as long as the first chorus.

> 8 bars

## Outro

The song ends with a section that’s similar to the previous two breaks, but with even more instrumental layers.

> 4 bars

# Award Tour - A Tribe Called Quest

This classic hip hop track is also constructed by alternating between verses and choruses (more commonly called _hooks_ in hip hop), again all built in multiples of four bars.

## Intro

The four bar intro introduces the chords that appear throughout almost the entire track.

> 4 bars

## Hook (Chorus)

Here, the hook appears immediately after the intro, and before the verse. There are two eight bar hooks in this track and (unusually for choruses) each has slightly different lyrics. The third hook (which ends the track) is sixteen bars long.

> 8 bars

## Verse 1a

There are two 24-bar verses. These verses can be subdivided further: the two outer eight bar sections share the same music, while the inner eight bars are different. As is typical of hip hop, each verse features a different rapper.

> 24 bars

## Verse 1b

The middle eight bars of the verse have different chords than the outer two sections.

## Hook 2

This second hook has slightly different lyrics than the first hook.

> 8 bars

## Verse 2a

There are two 24-bar verses. These verses can be subdivided further: the two outer eight bar sections share the same music, while the inner eight bars are different. As is typical of hip hop, each verse features a different rapper.

> 24 bars

## Verse 2b

The middle eight bars of the verse have different chords than the outer two sections.

## Hook 3

The third and final hook is sixteen bars long — twice the length of the earlier hooks.

# Ni - Ten - Ichi - Ryu - Photek

This classic drum and bass track is quite different from the previous examples. Because the track is almost all drums, terms like "verse" and "chorus" don't really make sense. Instead, the form is defined by changes in _textural density_ — how much is happening at any point in the song.

But even here, you can see that most of the sections are in regular lengths that are multiples of eight bars.

## Intro

The intro is divided into two 16-bar sections. This first section uses sparse drum hits to establish the dark and mysterious mood for the whole track.

> 16 bars

## Intro B

The second 16 bar section introduces a sort of “bassline” made up of drum sounds that have an audible pitch. This bassline is one of the only stable, repeating elements in the entire track.

> 16 bars

## A

In this 32-bar section, the drums finally enter completely. The drums undergo a kind of continuous variation; there is very little literal repetition of patterns.

> 32 bars

## B

This 48-bar section is the most dense part of the whole track. An additional layer of drums is added, and higher-pitched flute-like sounds appear irregularly.

> 48 bars

## Short Breakdown

Breakdowns serve to provide a contrast with sections of high activity or density. This short breakdown feels like time has completely stopped (although it works out to be exactly four-bars long).

> 4 bars

## B2

A return of the dense “B” section material, but for only half the length: 24 bars. The high-pitched flute-like sounds are not used in this section.

> 24 bars

## Break

This much longer breakdown again serves as a break from the relentless drive of the continuously changing drums. Again, this breakdown has no sense of rhythm, but works out to be exactly 16 bars long.

> 16 bars

## A2

A return of the lighter “A” section material, which gradually fades out to end the song. Note that the flute-like sounds from the “B” section are used here. So this section is sort of a hybrid of “A” and “B.”

---
%% 
(resources:: Resources - 202501301754)
%%
> [!info] 2025-01-30
> > [!example] **Resources:**
> > - [The Playground | Ableton](https://learningmusic.ableton.com/the-playground.html)
