---
tags:
  - music
  - music_theory
aliases:
  - melodies
title: melodies 101
description: basic melodies
parent nodes:
  - "[[music theory]]"
child nodes: 
annotation-target:
---

Like basslines, melodies are patterns of single notes. While basslines are low-pitched, melodies are generally high-pitched and define the "identity" of the song in many styles of music; if you ask someone to sing a particular song, they'll usually sing the melody.

## Love Will Tear Us Apart - Joy Division

The main melody in this classic track is played by both a synthesizer and a bass guitar (in different pitch ranges and with slightly different rhythms). It's also sung during certain sections of the song called the _choruses_.

This melody uses only notes in the scale of D major. But the melody starts with a long E, creating a sense of tension against the implied key that continues throughout the whole song.

Notice the shape (or _contour_) of the melody. At the beginning, it moves up and down the scale by adjacent notes. But at the end, it leaps from B up to D and then down to A. This contrast between _stepwise_ and _leapwise_ motion helps to make the melody strong and memorable.

- ==Start with a note other than tonic to create a sense of tension.==
- ==Stepwise movement vs Leapwise movement==

## Tour de France - Kraftwerk

Synthesizers and drum machines play all of the sounds in this track (except the vocal parts), and the primary melody is a synthetic string-like sound.

The main melody in this track is very long, but you can break it down into four smaller pieces (or _phrases_) that are simple variations of each other.

The first and second phrases are identical, with the exception of the final note. In the first phrase, the last two notes descend from B♭ to A♭, while in the second phrase, they ascend from B♭ to C. You can hear this as a sort of "question and answer" relationship; the first phrase sounds somehow incomplete, while the second phrase sounds like it serves to resolve the first.

The third and fourth phrases also work as a pair. The third is identical to the first, except that it has been transposed up to start on G instead of F. Finally, the fourth phrase "answers" the third, with another small variation at the end of the phrase.

> Borrowed from [Paul Hindemith - Sonata for flute and piano](https://youtu.be/GaiilkTxOJI)

- ==Use Question and Answer or Call and Response.==
	- Starts with a pattern, ends one way for the first two bars and another in the next two.
- ==Start with different keys other than tonic with the same pattern.==

## Praxis - Ikonika

There are many layers in this song, and all of them are played by electronic instruments of some kind.

This song is in E minor. Much like the Kraftwerk example, the melody is a pair of nearly identical phrases, with a small variation occurring at the end of the phrase. Each phrase is two bars long, and only the last note differs.

The rhythm is interesting; the pair of ascending five-note lines from D up to B creates a sort of rhythmic "tension" as the notes land in a different place in the bar each time through the figure.

## Ride - Robert Hood

As with the Kraftwerk example, all of the sounds here are made by synthesizers and drum machines. There are actually very few sounds being used, but they continuously evolve.

Robert Hood was working extensively with the **Roland Alpha Juno 2** synthesizer on this record, and it's likely that this is the synth used for this melodic sound.

In addition to the drums, there is only a single pattern of notes that repeats throughout the entire track.

This is an example of minimal techno; here the focus is on slow, subtle changes, primarily to the nature of the sounds themselves, rather than to the notes and rhythms.

We notice that this line jumps between a very wide range of pitches. As you listen to it repeat, you might sometimes hear it as one part, while at other times it might separate into two interlocking parts, with the high notes suggesting a melody and the low notes suggesting a bassline.

> [Play with Ride](https://learningmusic.ableton.com/make-melodies/ride-variations.html)

---
%% 
(resources:: Resources - 202501292348)
%%
> [!info] 2025-01-29
> > [!example] **Resources:**
> > - [Play with Melodies](https://learningmusic.ableton.com/make-melodies/play-with-melodies.html)
