---
tags:
  - personal
aliases:
  - bejbunia
title: marcelina
description: how I feel
parent nodes:
  - "[[personal]]"
child nodes:
annotation-target:
---

==Sometimes we’re so focused on the future that we forget we’re in the middle of what we used to dream of.== 
  

Marcelina,  

It’s almost impossible for me to find the right words to tell you how you make me feel. 

When I’m near you, all my fears and insecurities vanish. I feel safe, safer than I’ve ever felt. 

When you smile, it warms me and makes me happy, like seeing the sun rise in the distance after a cold and dark night. 

When I hold you, I feel like I am the luckiest person on Earth.

When I look into your eyes, I finally start to see who I am. Who I want to be. Who I need to be. 

I feel seen. I feel heard. I finally feel understood. 

==You are beautiful. You make my world beautiful.== 

Every second I spend with you, I learn more and more about what heaven would feel like. 

My day begins when I wake up next to you, and it ends when I kiss you goodnight. 

I want to know everything about you. 

==I want to know YOU.== 

I want to be the man you deserve. 

I want to grow with you, I want you to grow with me. I want us never to stop growing. 
  
I want to be your fellow traveller through space and time. 
  
I want to be your best friend. 

I want to kiss you when you're smiling, hold you when you're tired, and wrap you in my arms when the world gets too loud.

I want your head on my chest, your fingers on my skin, your laugh filling the room like music I never wanna turn off.

I want to be yours. Only yours. 

I want everything. Only with you. 

I want you. Only you.

Can I be yours? Only yours. 

P.S. I’m not proposing, can I be your boyfriend (exclusive lover)?
